README.md, before:

# Black Rook RookScript

Copyright (c) 2017 Black Rook Software. All rights reserved.  
[http://blackrooksoftware.com/projects.htm?name=rookscript](http://blackrooksoftware.com/projects.htm?name=rookscript)  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/RookScript](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/RookScript)

### Required Libraries

Black Rook Commons 2.31.0+  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/Common](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/Common)

Black Rook Common I/O 2.5.0+  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonIO](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonIO)

Black Rook Common Lang 2.10.1+  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonLang](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonLang)

### Introduction

This library assists in compiling/running RookScript, a non-host-specific scripting language.

### Library

Contained in this release is a series of classes that should be used for RookScript functions. 
The javadocs contain basic outlines of each package's contents.

### Other

This program and the accompanying materials
are made available under the terms of the GNU Lesser Public License v2.1
which accompanies this distribution, and is available at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.html

A copy of the LGPL should have been included in this release (LICENSE.txt).
If it was not, please contact us for a copy, or to notify us of a distribution
that has not included it.

Commit message:

Added build/pull dependencies target.

README.md, after:

# Black Rook RookScript

Copyright (c) 2017-2018 Black Rook Software. All rights reserved.  
[http://blackrooksoftware.com/projects.htm?name=rookscript](http://blackrooksoftware.com/projects.htm?name=rookscript)  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/RookScript](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/RookScript)

### NOTICE

This library is currently in **EXPERIMENTAL** status. This library's API
may change many times in different ways over the course of its development!

### Required Libraries

Black Rook Commons 2.31.0+  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/Common](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/Common)

Black Rook Common I/O 2.5.0+  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonIO](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonIO)

Black Rook Common Lang 2.10.1+  
[https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonLang](https://github.com/BlackRookSoftware/CommonLang)

### Required Java Modules

[java.base](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/10/docs/api/java.base-summary.html)  

### Introduction

This library assists in compiling/running RookScript, a non-host-specific scripting language.

### Library

Contained in this release is a series of classes that should be used for RookScript functions. 
The javadocs contain basic outlines of each package's contents.

### Compiling with Ant

To download the dependencies for this project (if you didn't set that up yourself already), type:

	ant dependencies

A *build.properties* file will be created/appended to with the *dev.base* property set.
	
To compile this library with Apache Ant, type:

	ant compile

To make a JAR of this library, type:

	ant jar

And it will be placed in the *build/jar* directory.

### Other

This program and the accompanying materials
are made available under the terms of the GNU Lesser Public License v2.1
which accompanies this distribution, and is available at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.html

A copy of the LGPL should have been included in this release (LICENSE.txt).
If it was not, please contact us for a copy, or to notify us of a distribution
that has not included it.
